Good morning, Deborah. Welcome to the Education and Workforce Select Committee
hearing for the Immigration
Bill. We've got five minutes with you this morning, that includes time for
questions, and we'll hand over to you now.
Yes, good morning, Chair. Thank you.
Nice to see you again and the committee again.
Well, I just thought that I would, as I did last week, just
leave it open for questions.
I think that's the best use of the few minutes that we have together.
Wonderful. Yes, it is, especially given that we've got only five minutes.
Do we have any questions from the committee?
I've got one to start. I just wondered, we have heard a lot
from
all of our submitters really, the things that they obviously
don't like about the bill or do like about the bill. What would you change?
We want to hear the constructive stuff.
What would you change immediately?
Yeah. The focus would be on removing the humanitarian appeals for visitor visa
holders.
I don't think there's a policy case for that.
It's only going to affect
just over 100 people a year,
when over 400,000 visas are issued visitor
visas. And, there's a high success rate for
exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian nature that really affect
families that are really doing it tough in New Zealand.
And it's just going to move that
heat and stress in the system into ministerial appeals, to electorate
offices, to the media. It's just going to create a lot of noise and
disruption in the system, and
my submission would say there's no justification for that.
And one small follow-up question. Do you see that number escalating?
Because you said, it's only 100 a year.
That's now. If it were to be left as is,
do you see that number escalating?
Those numbers have been pretty stable, and the reason there's been a small
increase of a couple of dozen a month is because of the
COVID lockdowns where people were here for years and had families and kids and that
kind of thing. There's actually been a stable number,
relatively, to the numbers. And when we're talking about this
is the place, the specialist tribunal, that looks at our obligations
concerning rights of the children in those international obligations.
Why would we move such complexity for
such vulnerable cases in the community that
create such disruption for the rest of the system?
Why would we take it away from that specialist tribunal?
Mm. Thank you.
When there's been no business case for it. Yeah.
Thank you. And a question from Phil Twy.
Yeah. Thanks, Chair.
So Deborah, a couple of things.
Drawing on your experience as a practitioner, could you talk about,
and your knowledge of the data in terms of
the appeals that go to the IPT for these
humanitarian appeals against deportation.
What are the kinds of cases? What are the kinds of people and the kind of
situations that are in those numbers?
Yeah, sure. So first of all, this is a tough tribunal.
And so there's about a 40% success rate, which
means that's very high. And you've got cases
like, and 40% of the cases are
the Pasifika community. And they're cases like a family might have a
child with autism or special needs or a disability, and they really need that
auntie to stay because they've bonded with the kid, because they've been looking
after the child.
Or the grandparents of there supporting that family with those children with those
special needs. That seems to be a bit of a theme that I'm seeing coming
through.
Families with disability needs, needing those other families to
support them. Yeah, that's quite common.
Mm.
And,
Deborah, for the benefit of people who haven't had direct
engagement with the tribunal, could you just
talk a bit about
how the tribunal works, the quality of its decisions,
how it functions?
Yeah. So these appeals we're talking about, they're on the papers.
So we're not talking about court hearings.
The appellants have to pay quite a hefty fee, it's over $1,000 now, and that
can always be increased if we wanted to manage costs.
Appellants have to appeal within 42 days.
It's quite a narrow window, which is probably why a lot of people don't appeal.
And then it's a specialist tribunal.
It's internationally renowned. It's thorough, and it
applies New Zealand's international obligations to these cases.
So it's a place in New Zealand where we can have confidence that New
Zealand is meeting our international obligations.
So when we go to Geneva to report to the Human Rights Committee
and so on, and the Committee for the Rights of Children and People with
Disabilities, we know that that is a place in New Zealand that is looking
after and guarding those obligations for us.
Mm. Could you,
Katie, is that okay if I ask one more question?
If it can be concise. I'm just trying to come off speech-
Sure
... phone to, yep. Thank you.
Yeah. In these kinds of cases, Deborah, what are
New Zealand's international obligations?
Yeah, so they commonly involve the rights of the child, people with
disabilities, discrimination against women,
our fundamental human rights obligations in terms of
even sometimes living conditions.
It's about exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian
nature. And
human beings can be complicated and messy, and this is a place where
the tribunal can pick through all of the issues and consider whether
or not there's an exceptional case on humanitarian grounds.
And as I say,
it takes heat out of the system, so we don't have front page media
articles, electorate officers, ministers,
having to grapple with these very tough cases.
Thank you so much, Deborah. Really appreciate your participation in this process
and being available for us this morning.
Thank you.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter, who is Snow Ryan.
Snow, hopefully we've got you online and ready.
There we go.
Welcome. We have five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions.
Hopefully, we can see you. We can't hear you yet.
We definitely see you there. You just need to turn your camera on and
unmute yourself.
There we go.
Good morning.
Ah, good morning, Snow. We have five minutes with you this morning, and that
includes time for questions. So I'll hand it over to you now.
We can't see you yet, but if you can turn your camera on, but we can definitely
hear you.
Just one moment. I'll try with the camera.
I'm having problems with the Zoom meeting this morning, so.
Ah, that's okay. The point is that we can hear you, so it's not the end of the
world if you wanted to carry on.
Wonderful. I'll carry on so I don't waste any more of your time.
Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to speak this morning.
My name is Snow Ryan. I'm an everyday Kiwi.
I have submitted in writing on the specific provisions of this bill.
Today I want to use my five minutes differently, not to restate what
is in my written submission, but to place a concern before the
committee that I believe goes beyond the individual clauses.
My written submission raises proportionality, oversight, and
transparency. I stand by all of it.
But the deeper concern is this. The combined effect of these provisions
creates a structural architecture that comparable
democracies have demonstrated leads to serious harm.
And through intent-- No, sorry, not through intent, but through the
predictable logic of accumulated power without adequate
constraint.
The United Kingdom did not set out to wrongly detain and
deport British citizens. The Windrush scandal happened
because of an accumulation of individually defensible choices.
Extended liability periods, erosion of appeal rights,
data sharing without purpose limits, administrative detention
without judicial oversight.
The Windrush Independent Lessons Learned Review found that structural
features, not individual bad actors, were the primary drivers
of harm.
Every one of those structural features is present in this bill.
I have tabled a written addendum that sets out the case in a detail, which I
have not yet forwarded to the committee, and I would do so under the instruction of
the secretary.
But I want to name the most serious gap
directly. This bill does not establish statutory
flaws for immigration detention.
No maximum period before judicial review, no
prohibition on using prison facilities for
people who have committed no crime.
No duty to consider alternatives before detaining someone.
These are not technical omissions.
They are the conditions that enabled enforcement practices in the
United States and the United Kingdom that proved
extraordinarily difficult to reverse once normalized.
New Zealand has a narrow window to build different foundations.
That window is this committee and this bill.
I'm asking for three specific amendments.
Mandatory judicial review of detention within 72 hours,
explicit purpose limitation preventing enforcement agencies
from accessing data held by schools, health providers, and community
organizations, and a statutory review period of no
more than three years.
But I want to close with something larger.
This bill asks Parliament to make consequential decisions about the kind of
enforcement state New Zealand will become.
Decisions that will shape experience of Pasifika communities,
migrant workers, international students, and long-term residents for a
generation.
Those decisions deserve more than a select committee process and a
government majority.
I'm an advocate for citizens assemblies.
I believe this bill is precisely the kind of question a citizens
assembly exists to answer. Not because this committee cannot do its
job, but because the trade-offs between security, liberty, and the
kind of country we want to be are not technical questions.
They are democratic ones.
Ordinarily, New Zealanders, given time and evidence, are capable of
navigating that complexity. They have not been asked.
I urge the committee to consider recommending that the government convene a
citizens assembly on immigration enforcement powers before the
substantive provisions of this bill take effect.
That would not be a delay. It would be an act of democratic
confidence. New Zealand has historically done this well.
We can do it again.
Thank you, and I open for questions.
Thank you, Snow.
It doesn't appear that we have any questions for you, but it does not mean there's
a lack of interest at all. It means you've given us a really constructive and
helpful submission. So we thank you for that.
Wonderful. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll move on now to our next submitter, who we have New Zealand
Council for Civil Liberties.
For that, we have Stephen Enslin, and
hopefully we see you online. Yes, there we are. All right.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
We'll hand to you now.
Okay. Thank you very much. Good morning, everyone.
The New Zealand Council for Civil Liberties strongly objects to this
billMinister Stanford is quoted in Radio New Zealand article about
the council submission saying that the ministry did not intend to
limit people's freedom with this bill.
"Did not intend" is about the best thing that the minister can say from our
perspective.
First, it is admission that the bill does limit everyone's freedom,
and second, it is an admission of error.
The minister is telling this committee that the bill is broken and needs to be
fixed. As we noted in our written submission, the
Attorney General's Bill of Rights compliance report implies that the core
functions of immigration compliance are so important
that any limitation of our rights can be justified.
Mostly that's just another lazy report from the Attorney General, but it
does accidentally introduce the topics which are at the core of this debate,
which are:
how important are the core functions of immigration compliance?
And
what problem is this bill addressing?
The council believes that immigration compliance already have too many
powers, not that they have too few.
If we cut immigration compliance inside our borders entirely,
we would not merely be more free, we would be happier and more productive.
Our immigration officers are already going around and harassing people,
and more importantly from the council's perspective, interfering with our
hard-fought liberties.
The council's main point is that our civil liberties are vastly more important
than the core functions of immigration compliance.
The second issue is why does this bill exist?
The bill doesn't answer that question.
It says things like improving operations or increasing
effectiveness without the slightest awareness that those are not answers to the
question. Why do operations need improving?
And more to the point, where is the evidence that the principal act is
ineffective?
The regulatory impact statement does not answer the question either.
It merely says there is an opportunity to improve the
effectiveness of the compliance powers.
In short, the council does not believe that there is an effectiveness problem which
needs addressing, and we think that the committee should agree with us that the
minister has failed to present a compelling reason for change.
The council will not support any restrictive restrictions on the public's
freedoms for the purpose of immigration compliance, except at the border.
And the council remains steadfast in our belief that the existing power
imbalance at the border, where people effectively lose almost all of our
rights, is not sufficiently justified.
Civil liberties are under threat around the world.
Immigration enforcement is being used overseas as a
pretext for incarcerating people who have committed no offenses.
Given this context, we should be amending the Immigration Act to prevent
similar overreach from occurring here.
This bill does the opposite.
We ask the committee to recommend that this bill does not proceed.
I'll now open for questions.
Thank you. We have a question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, got a couple here just quickly, Madam Chair.
First of all, thank you for your presentation.
I just want to establish first, do you think every country
has the right to determine who can immigrate to it?
Who could immigrate to it? Yes.
You do?
Yes.
Okay. And if people come here on a visa and
their visa runs out,
those people then should they leave? Or what should happen to them?
Yes, those people should leave indeed.
So-
But enforcement powers could be given to police.
We don't need a specialty police force running around the country.
Hold on. You think the police should go around and do this job?
Not immigration officers who are professionally trained in this space and
understand the law?
I think that police are also trained and understand the law.
Yeah, but immigration is quite a specific-
The council believes. Yeah.
All right. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. And a question from Phil Twyford.
Yeah, thanks, Chair. Stephen, thanks for your submission.
Can you talk a bit more about why the
evolution of immigration staff
into being given increasing numbers of
compliance and enforcement powers so that they start to behave like a police
force, why you think that's a bad thing for
rights and for democracy?
We note in our submission that the
immigration claims not to be collecting evidence about the use of Section
280 powers.
Mm.
And so we stooped to repeating rumors, and the
word that we hear is that immigration officers are
out
going to places of business, stopping everyone there who is a person of
color, and demanding their papers already.
And we don't think that that is something we can support.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Stephen. We do appreciate your participation in the process, and your
submission as well, and being here with us this morning.
We'll move on-
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Thank you. We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Safe Haven Housing Trust Board.
We have Brian Johnson appearing on their behalf.
Brian, we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions.
Hopefully, Brian's jumping online.
Brian,
hopefully you heard all of that.
Just need you to turn your microphone off, turn your camera
on, and we'll be with
you.Brian,
you are there. We can see your
name on the screen.
Yeah.
Oh, there we go. We've got you.
I had to unmute myself, yeah. For some strange reason, I wasn't muted, but then
suddenly I was muted.
It's okay. It happens to the best of us.
If we can have 10 minutes with you, and that includes time for questions, we'll
hand over to you now.
Yes. Thank you.
I'm speaking to my revised submission that I sent in after I got
legal advice to present the points that I wanted to make in
a fashion that would suit the committee's analysis of the
bill.
However, I would like to say that I've been involved, on an
unpaid, voluntary basis, supporting asylum seekers since
1989.
And up until 2018, I had
worked with legal professional people and
in my own capacity
to promulgate 158
appeals of IPT decisions, and
124 of them were successful. I'm not saying I won them,
but
the support resulted in those people.
In perspective, I think in that time there were 3,500
cases that went through the IPT, so the number of
appeals that were
turned over is a very small percentage.
But to the people
whose lives were affected by winning the appeal, it
was a hugely important and significant event in their life.
During that time, I discovered that Immigration
never followed up the people who were deported.
So a businessman in south Auckland funded me on
several occasions to follow the people who were
deported. You can understand that that put my own person
at quite considerable risk. But that was how
I learned the information about the fact that of the
34 that were declined, probably half of them should
actually have also won as well,
because the consequences of what they said was going to happen to them if they were
deported from New Zealand actually happened.
And
if any of the committee members want to ask me what some of those things were,
I'm happy to answer.
But I won't go into the detail.
They are absolutely tragic and terrible circumstances.
So we, as a trust, oppose
this bill,
and
the
trust broadly endorses five central concerns identified by the
Law Society material, which is the removal of humanitarian appeal
rights, expanded resident deportation liability, broader
information and document powers, and the bar on further visa
applications after withdrawal of an asylum claim.
And to that point,
it is significant to say that the bill seems to be a
reaction to the fact that
of the 79
or 81 people we currently house
who are waiting for an asylum claim,
most of them have been with us for two years now, and they haven't even had their
first interview at the RSU.
So if we then have penalties
for crimes committed, well, I don't receive
any government funding.
I need a full-time psychologist.
I asked in front of the board last Friday, "Of the people that
we're helping, what percentage do you think have mental health problems as a
result of the delays in the RSU processing?"
And to my astonishment, I was expecting her to say, "Oh, 20% or
25%." She said 93% of the applicants we have at the
moment are showing mental health problems as a result of
these delays. Now, when people have mental health problems,
they often go and do things which
they wouldn't normally do. So if that's a
crime,
then this bill seems to be saying that
later on, they become a Kiwi, but they aren't a Kiwi,
because once it's dug up that they had committed a crime, then they're
deported. Well, the deportation of
people who have won an asylum claim is a complete
farce concerning the asylum claim.
So there should be no right of deportation of somebody who has
had a successful asylum claim,
is my opinion concerning this.
The other thing is that the regulatory impact statement
is actually untrue or incorrect in so
many places in that statement that I would love to
have 20 minutes of the committee's time to go through section by
section of the RIS and show why
that RIS is not reliable. And it
astounds me that government members are being
asked to make decisions based on an RIS that has
so many fallacies and so many errors in it.
Concerning the withdrawal of asylum claims,
over the years, I've known several of our clients who
have withdrawn their asylum claims because they were high-level
professional people. They came here.
Many over those 30 years, many of my
clients were six years and eight years winning
their appeal in the High CourtAnd
in that time,
they were discovered to have exceptional skills
in commercial areas in New Zealand, and they were recruited by
companies,
and they gained a viable tax-paying
job.
So then they wanted to
withdraw or apply for
residence on the grounds of their skills.
So I don't believe there should be any limitation to
that. That's an advantage to the New Zealand society
to have a freedom of asylum-seeking
people who have high-level
skills or valuable skills to contribute to New Zealand, to be able
to change their mind, particularly when we have two
years you're waiting to get your first interview at the RSU.
In fact,
I think if I research it, I'd find that it's even more than two years.
So, the humanitarian
appeal rights
must be retained
to
take away the right for a judicial review or an appeal to the High Court
of an asylum seeker who has
not been found to be a successful asylum seeker by
the IPT is no...
I
have to say, over 37 years working with the IPT, I have the highest regard
for the IPT, for its officers. They're fantastic people.
But we're all humans, and if in 3,500
decisions,
could have gone a different way, that's not a reflection on
incompetence or anything like that at the IPT.
It's just there are human factors, or there are
evidential factors that the client couldn't produce
that therefore made the IPT make the decision they made.
So,
the
expanded deportation liability also
worries me because over the years that I worked with so many people,
I found that unfortunately some communities
ring up Immigration and tell a whole lot of lies about the
person to try to discredit their claim.
And
this
involves
another added complexity for
them.
So I'm worried that if we give too
much discretionary power to immigration officers
without going through the due legal process, that some of those
allegations made by people trying to cause harm to asylum seekers will be
acted on, and the result will be that the person will be
deported.
So the other
concern I have comes from direct experience when, for two
years,
Elizabeth at the Asylum Seeker Support Trust and myself were given
permission to go to the airport and interview arriving asylum seekers.
And how they were treated at that time
was just absolutely appalling.
I mean, I found one man one day chained by his arms and legs
to the bed and was vomiting and was choking in his own vomit
while he was being held in a room for three nights to be
then deported from New Zealand without any due process to his claim.
So I'm sorry, I can't support any
interview basis at the airport that turns people around based
on an interview. The other thing that
astounds me is
the fact that people are required to have evidence of their
identity.
Over the years, I've known many people who have come into New Zealand to
acclaim asylum who had no evidence of their identity
and had to
get that information sent to them because of the
immediate departure they had from their home
country.
Sorry have I run out of time?
Sorry, that was just me sneezing.
No, it's okay.
Brian, you have got a very short time for questions.
We have one question from Dr. Panjit Palmer if we-
Yep
... can get that one through.
Thank you so much, Brian, for your submission.
I very quickly want to understand from you then what level of risk you think
is acceptable for any kind of serious intervention
to be justified.
Because you've talked of various methods where people are identified, and you
don't like those ways. So just want to understand from you what level of risk you
think is acceptable where interventions can be justified that are
described in this bill.
I don't think there's any justification.
I think we have a robust present legal system
that
provides the opportunity for asylum seekers to claim asylum.
I do wish that in addition to what is done,
that those people who are deported
were tracked by Immigration, so they could, and
the Justice Department, because IPT is part of the Justice Department,
so they could do some self-analysis themselves on
the quality of their decision-making.
But once again, I do not want to be seen to be
saying that
IPT is not competent. Most cases, I think
that the IPT's decision
failing somebody is usually based around the difficulty of
them providing evidence
of the claim they're making on account of the
complete collapse of any civil
and legal system in the country they came fromI
remember recently, two years ago, a lady came to New Zealand from
a country which I never really knew anything about.
But when I read their human rights record in the
United Nations, I realized why would anybody ever want to live in that country?
Because you just have no human rights.
Therefore, very difficult for her to produce the evidence to support her
claim.
Thank you, Brian. We really appreciate you being part of this process in both
your written and verbal submissions.
Could I just make one last statement, is that one of the difficulties I have
is that our trust was only formed in 2019, and
at that time,
the last bulletin produced by Immigration at the airport was in
2019. I've been trying to get our trust listed in that
bulletin so people arriving could contact
us and receive our support. But
the lady at the airport, Imogen Prickett, has told me that there is no
funds to reprint the brochure. There is no funds to
update the website. So therefore, people don't know that we
exist. But we end up finding people living in the Manukau
Cemetery, the cemetery behind the church in the
Mall, et cetera. So there's absolutely appalling things are going
on, and
something needs to be done to fund this.
And we're not talking any large sum of money.
Brian, might I recommend that we take that offline?
This isn't the process to deal with that concern, but it's a fair concern.
So if you perhaps
get in touch with the committee offline, we can direct you to the right
person to get in touch about that.
Thank you very much. Thanks again for being part of this process.
Committee, we have
a slight change in our schedule, and so we will be back for our next
hearing at 9:50
AM. So if we can be back prior to that, a couple of minutes prior, that'd be
great.Coffee
or tea, Vanessa?
Coffee.
Frothy?
Yeah.
Got your voice back, Vanessa?
I have. I've got my voice back.
Yay.
Still a bit
on the deep and guttural side-
Right
... but I'm not quite sounding like Mike Batterick-
Lovely
... like I was last week.
That's funny.
Very good.
I have to start saying, "Vanessa Weening," like I did
Mike.
Love it.
Very successful. Just organize a car vere for next season.
Practical things carry on.
Car vere?
Yes. My last year's one left, so I've got someone else.
Important things carry on.
Mm-hmm.
I'm trying to work out how to manage my young worker.
She's pregnant. She's due in November, so I've got to manage that.
Oh, cool.
It'll be interesting in a
physically demanding environment that is a
dairy fest.
Ali Sunder, Law.
We've got Pooja Sunder and Stuart Dalziel joining us.
Hopefully
ready to go.
Here we go.
No, there we don't go. That's Jenny.
Here we go. Now we have.
Welcome, both. While you're getting yourselves sorted, we have 10 minutes with
you. That includes time for questions.
I think we've had you both on already, so you know what you're doing.
Okay, time is yours. Go for it. Thank you.
Morning.
Yeah, well, we thought that we've put in our written submissions, so
we probably
suspect that you've read them, and
therefore there wouldn't be much use in us reading
them out to you. And we thought the time would be better used
for any questions that you have for us based on our submissions.
Thank you for that, both of you. That is helpful because we do quite often
have everyone recite their written submission for us a second time.
Look, we have a question already from Ricardo Menendez March, so we'll start with
Ricardo.
Thank you very much, both. Hey, just in layman terms, what are your concerns
for particularly children that could
come about due to the changes to humanitarian appeals?
Stuart, you want to take this one?
Yeah, well,
the tribunal
would make a written decision where they would outline
specifically how they took into account the welfare and best
interests of the child as a primary consideration.
Whereas you remove that and you put that as an absolute
discretion to a minister or a delegated decision-maker
who needs to provide no reasons whatsoever,
then the question becomes is, well, have they really considered the
welfare and best interests of the child, and in what way?
Because
I think of it in terms of
one of the suggestions as, well,
people can make a request to Immigration New Zealand to
cancel their deportation liability under Section
177.
And under Section 177,
immigration compliance officers have a duty to consider
international obligations.
But of the nearly 1,000 DLNs
issued in the past five years, compliance has canceled
15 of those. Yet when people have made
humanitarian appeals, 50% of those people who have
appealed have won. So what that tells me is, is there's
something deeply wrong with the process that we have at
the moment, that
immigration officers and compliance are not really considering the
international obligations because if they were, we would be seeing a
far higher level of cancellations than we see at the
moment. And those decisions, again, are absolute discretion,
so therefore you don't know what's actually happened.
And sorry, just for the committee briefly, what are some of the obligations that
you're concerned that are being ignored?
Some of the, like you don't have to name them.
Well, the welfare and best interests of the child,
family unity,
disability rights.
The list goes on and on. There is
a vast array of international obligations that New
Zealand has signed itself up to, but it would appear
that when you look at the stats, that compliance is
failing New Zealand and those obligations because
the story that's told on the tribunal decisions
says something different.
And just to be very, very clear, we're talking about
0.13% of all visitor
visa holders who've made this appeal.
Made this appeal, not been granted the appeal, made the appeal.
So very, very, very small numbers. This is being blown out of proportion.
Okay, thank you. We have a question from Phil Twyford.
Yeah, supplementary on the same thing, really.
Pooja and Stuart, you're both very experienced at
dealing with cases that
go to the IPT. What's your view about the quality of
their work and
the rigor, and how do you
rate them as
part of the sort of institutional framework of immigration policy?
I think there's a reason they were created to begin with, that we definitely needed
this, and we definitely needed a judicial body to consider the humanitarian
circumstances, consider the international obligations, and ensure that this test
was being done in a way that actually gave
proper merit to our international obligations.
Look, there will be cases that we will appeal from the tribunal.
There'll be cases that we win at the tribunal.
There'll be cases that we lose at the tribunal.
And I think every person and every body at every point
has the opportunity and should really improve.
However, I think if we compare them to decision-making by an
absolute discretion decision-maker, it's night and day.
Mm.
The
basics is that at least we can see why they've made that decision
and the reasons behind it, whereas we're never going to be able to see that from
another decision-maker where it's absolute discretion.
Hmm.
Yeah. And what about,
I don't know if you've got the numbers at your fingertips, but
what about how rigorous and demanding the APT is
in terms of, and the numbers of, in terms of winning and losing cases,
appeals?
I think it was about 50% that we had a look at, and Stuart did
crunch the numbers.
And the thing is though, 50% is such an
incredibly low number overall, right?
We're talking about half a million visitor visas, and we're talking, oh,
half, and then .13 of them actually make an appeal.
And then half of them succeed. So excuse my maths, but we're looking at about
.07 of all-
Mm
... visitor visa
holders who make these appeals. And here's the thing, the tribunal holds an
incredibly high standard.
Mm.
This is not that everyone who lodges that appeal is getting it.
The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal have also outlined how high that standard
is. Exceptional
humanitarian circumstances is exceptional.
It is not special. It's not just, "Oh my God, I feel bad for this person." It is
exceptional. And then there's a second one, whether it's unjust or unduly harsh.
You might find it exceptional and say, "Yep, no, but unjust or unduly ...
Not unjust or unduly harsh for them to be deported." Might find both and still say,
"You know what? Still, this person has offended," or, "This person has done
something that makes us feel-"
Yeah
... that they're not in the public interest to let them remain in New Zealand.
So there are three separate stages to go through.
So-
It's not an easy appeal.
So chair, got time for one more sub?
Yep. One more.
So, for committee members who haven't dealt with these cases,
actually, what does exceptional circumstances mean?
Can you give us some examples so people can kind of imagine what-
Yeah
... are we talking about?
Oh, so many. One, potentially if, for example, a
parent is in New Zealand and something's happened in their home country, a
coup or something along those lines, where they cannot go back, their house has
been taken, the people they were living with have been arrested for whatever
reason because of a coup in that country. They cannot physically go back.
There is nowhere to go back. That's one.
Mm.
Another one could be a New Zealand citizen partner who can't support
partner number three because they've faced family violence and supported someone
else in the past. Now they've got a child who is incredibly attached to
partner number three. They're very close.
There is psychological evidence to show that the child will suffer real
developmental concerns, New Zealand citizen child, real developmental concerns if
partner number three, the unlawful person, has to go back now.
That is what exceptional humanitarian circumstances are.
It's not, "I've overstayed here. I've been here for 10 years.
Come on, give me a visa."
Mm.
Tribunal routinely-
Or, you know, "Come on, a visitor visa.
Give me a visa."
The tribunal routinely says just being in a
relationship with a New Zealander is not exceptional in
and of itself. There needs to be something else
that's going to take it over the line.
So, I wouldn't be led to
believe that the tribunal's an easy touch, and therefore we
need to take it away from them and realign things.
If the consideration was that the tribunal's an easy touch, then
change the test that the tribunal has to administer.
At least then we have some clarity of what it
is. I think
the thing, as Puji said, we looked at the numbers.
It seems to me that this bill is driven
by
I don't know what, because the stats don't actually
suggest that we have a problem.
The minister talked about, I think there was 14
people who've claimed refugee status who have
committed crimes, and therefore we need to tighten the screws
around the refugee.
That represents 0.7% of claimants.
Again, it's the wood chippings on the
floor that we're brushing up here to-
Yes
... in order to make up a bill. It just seems
unnecessary.
There are other things that everyone can focus on that are more important.
Thank you. Thank you very much, both of you.
That is the time that we've got for you this morning, but appreciate, again, your
written and your,
obviously the chance we could have to ask you some questions as well.
So that's really appreciated. And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
Thank you.
Now, hopefully, during that time, we've been able to get Wellington
Community Justice Project online, Max Irving.
We have the Asia Pacific Refugee Rights Network.
Ah, wonderful. Yeah, look, let's just be agile, and we'll welcome
Klaus and Hafsa on for the Asia Pacific
Refugee Rights Network.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning. Welcome.
Do we have Klaus coming on as well?
Klaus will not be joining.
Ah, that's okay.
So I'll-
Well, it's all with you. That is okay
... I'll welcome-
Welcome to the committee
... it will be only me.
Okay. We have-
Thank you. Speaking on behalf of both of us.
Brilliant. We have 10 minutes with you, so that includes time for questions, and
we'll hand over to you now
Sure. Thank you so much. Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you, Chair and members of the committee for the opportunity to
speak today. So my name is Hafsa Khamisuddin, and I am the
Co-Secretary General of the Asia Pacific Refugee Rights Network,
which is also known as APRRN. APRRN is a regional network of
more than 300 civil society organizations and individuals across
28 countries in Asia and Pacific region,
including New Zealand.
Our members work to advance the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, stateless
people, internally displaced people, and other people on the move.
I also speak today from my own lived experience.
I am a former Rohingya refugee from Myanmar.
I came to New Zealand in 2019 and became a New Zealand citizen only
last year.
So I speak not only from a regional advocacy perspective, but also as
someone who understand personally what it means to seek
safety and rebuild life in a new country.
I want to begin by acknowledging New Zealand's longstanding role in refugee
protection and resettlement. New Zealand has provided safety
and a new beginning to many people from our region.
Its Refugee Quota Program, Community Sponsorship
Initiative, and humanitarian commitments have made
a real difference in many people lives.
That is why APRRN is deeply concerned about the Immigration
Bill and the related parliamentary paper.
Our central message is simple.
APRRN urges the committee to recommend that this amendment
be withdrawn or, at the very least, substantially reconsidered.
We are concerned that the proposed changes risk undermining New Zealand's
reputation for fairness, human rights, and refugee protection.
They may also have serious consequences for refugees, asylum seekers,
migrants, children, women, and other people who are already in
vulnerable situations.
So I would like to focus on three main concerns and then briefly address
any wider impacts. The first concern, APRRN is
concerned that the proposed power for immigration officers to request
identification based on suspicion,
even if the intention is administrative, this power
may have discriminatory impacts in practice.
People who are visibly migrants
and from refugee background, Muslim, Asian, African,
Middle Eastern, or from the racialized communities may feel they are being
treated as a suspicion because of how they look,
how they speak, their accents, their name, ethnicity, or country of
origin.
For refugees and asylum seekers, this can particularly be harmful.
Many have already experienced state surveillance, arbitrary
questioning, police harassment, or threats from authorities in
their countries of origin. When similar dynamic appear in a
country of supposed protection, it can trigger fear,
trauma, and mistrust.
The practical effect may be that people avoid public institution.
They may avoid hospital, police, schools, employment
services or family violence support because they fear immigration
consequences if they do so.
This does not make communities safer.
It pushes people further into the shadows.
Secondly, APRRN is deeply concerned about the proposed restriction on
alternative visa pathways for people who withdraw asylum
claims. This one is the most troubling parts of the proposal.
People may withdraw asylum claims for many legitimate reasons.
Their circumstances may change.
They may enter a genuine relationship with New Zealand partner.
They may marry. They may have children. They may receive a job offer.
They may become eligible for another visa pathway that
better reflects their current situation.
A rigid ban on alternative visa pathway risks punishing people
for ordinary legitimate life change.
For example, if a person seeking asylum forms a
genuine and settled relationship, it seems unnecessarily harsh to prevent them from
applying for a partnership visa simply because they
previously sought asylum.
Similarly, if someone has skill, employment, and opportunity to contribute to New
Zealand, the law should not automatically block that person from
regularizing their status.
Thirdly, APRRN is concerned about the proposed limitation on humanitarian appeal
rights. Humanitarian appeal rights are not a loophole.
They are important safe ground. They allow independent oversight in
complex cases where removal of New Zealand may have serious
consequences.
This safeguard is especially important for people with trauma history,
health concern, family responsibility, or risks of
harms if they return. Limiting appeal rights may
have serious consequences for children.
Many families facing deportation have children who have grown up here,
attend school here, speak English, have friends here,
and may have very limited connection to their parents' country of origin.
Deportation can disrupt education, damage mental health,
separate families, send children to unfamiliar environments where
they may not speak the language or have support.
New Zealand has obligation under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Meaningful humanitarian appeal rights help ensure that children's best
interests are properly considered before life-changing decisions are
made. I also want to briefly highlight the wider impacts of this bill.
For refugees, safety is not a physical safety.
Safety also means stability, dignity, belonging,
and the ability to rebuild their life without constant fear.
Many refugees arrive here after years of persecution,
insecurity, displacement, detention, exploitation, or family
separationMeasures that increase
surveillance, reduce appeal rights, or create fear of deportation
can worsen anxiety, depression, trauma responses, and
insecurity.
From my own experience, even with English language skill that I had when
I first came here, work experience, and some understanding of
institution, my first years in New Zealand were not easy.
It took time to understand system, become independent, and feel
grounded. For people facing language barrier,
trauma, family separation, racism, poverty, disability,
and insecure immigration status, the challenges are even greater.
The law should support people to feel safe enough to participate,
contribute, and belong. It should not deepen fear.
We're also concerned
that this bill may contribute to negative public
discourses about refugees and
migrants.
Around the world, refugees and migrants are increasingly used as
political scapegoats. They are blamed for crime, housing
pressure, economy difficulty, public service strain, or
social decline. New Zealand has historically taken a more principled and balanced
approach. Our concern is that the bill may unintentionally shift the
public conversation in a more punitive and
suspicious direction.
That would be harmful not only for refugees and migrants, but for New Zealand
society as a whole. Finally, APRN is particularly concerned
about the impact on women and girls and other groups facing heightened
vulnerability. Women and girls with insecure immigration status
may already face family violence, gender-based violence, sexual exploitation,
trafficking, workplace exploitation, economic dependence, and
language barrier and social isolation.
If immigration settings create more fear of enforcement and
deportation, women may be less likely to seek help.
A woman experiencing violence may decide not to call police,
not to access healthcare, or not to report abuse, and not to approach
a supportive organization because she fears immigration consequences
for herself and for her family. The restriction on alternative
visa pathways may also have gender impact.
Some women may withdraw asylum claims because of family pressure, trauma,
misinformation, dependence on a partner, lack of legal advice, or
relationship changes.
A rigid ban could leave them with fewer options
to regularize or escape unsafe situation.
We therefore ask the committee to assess these reforms through a gender,
child rights, disability,
race equity, refugee protection, and trauma-informed lens.
In conclusion, APRN respectfully urges the committee to reconsider
the proposed amendments. New Zealand should not move away from its profound
tradition of refugee protection, fairness, human rights, and humanitarian
leadership. At a time of rising displacement, shrinking
resettlement places, reduced humanitarian funding, and increasing
anti-migrants rhetoric globally, New Zealand leadership matters
now more than ever.
APRN recommends that the committee
withdraw or sustain consideration for the proposed amendment bill for that matter.
And thank you again for the opportunity to speak. I welcome your question.
Thank you. We have time for one very quick question from Riccardo Mini
Desmarch.
Thank you, and I hope you can hear me okay.
Yeah, great. My quick question is, what do you think will be the
impact on the wellbeing of asylum seekers under the
proposal of this bill? If you wouldn't mind, just as someone who's experienced the
system and works with people experiencing the system.
Well, I have also briefly mentioned in my
statement, I will
re-emphasize it again, because for the asylum seeker, this may be the
one last hope in their life, right?
So they have a lot of oppression and surveillance
in their own country, like myself, and maybe somebody was born as a stateless
person like myself. So coming to another country, seeking this protection
may be their one last hope
for their survival, for their family, for their future.
So having this immigration amendment and on this
enhancement is like constraining for their every possibility
to exercise their fair human rights under the refugee
protection law. It can mean physical, it can mean mental,
and not only for that person alone, also for the person
family, whanau, community as well.
Because when somebody is dealing with mental health and hopelessness, it will
inevitably also impact their
family and their communities as well.
And the worst-case scenario will be,
well, I can relate to myself. When somebody finding a position there is no
reason to live for, there is no hope to look forward to, it can be somebody
thinking even taking their own life.
I had that thought for myself a couple of times when I was still seeking
protection in country of refuge. Did that answer your question?
Thank you very much for being part of this process.
I do appreciate it, and for your written submission as well.
So, we'll move on now to our next submitter, but thank you very much,
Afsar, for joining us.
Now we have Matthew Robson, who
is joining us.
Thank you for being agile, Matthew.
There we go. You'll have to just
unmute and turn your camera on. We will be able to see you and hear.
There we go, and we have five minutes with you this morning, Matthew.
That includes time for questions, and we'll move on to you now
Thank you very much.
I would've liked to appear in person.
It's always better, but I understand the restrictions you've got this
week, having been there.
When I was in Cabinet in 2002,
Helen Clark
said to a minister who brought a bill before the Cabinet
that was particularly repressive, that the department of
that minister had been waiting for a minister like him to try and
push this through the Cabinet. That is what's happening with this
bill, in my submission.
There is no problem with overstayers.
There is a problem, root, stock, and branch, with
the Immigration Act.
That's what I'm appealing to members of this committee to do
research on this question. And there are many
of us who are lawyers,
members of Parliament, who know the problems that
people who are migrants and their New Zealand families
face
with the strictures of immigration.
What you're looking at is the foot of the elephant.
Every day that members of Parliament have their cornflakes in
Copperfield's and put kiwi fruit on it, it's possibly picked
by somebody who doesn't have a visa.
Now, this minister that Helen Clark berated with her famous
death stare
withdrew the particular bill. I'd suggest that Erica
Stanford do the same because we've got this three-years cycle
when a particular issue gets beaten up as a moral panic, that
there are overstayers causing a problem.
The problem, as members of Parliament who are honest, and I'm saying they're all
honest, all members of Parliament are honest,
is that when someone presents with a problem with Immigration,
they've felt that they've been dealt fairly with by
Immigration.
I could wallpaper my house with rejection notices,
deportation notices over a period of 30 to 40 years
dealing as a lawyer, a member of Parliament, and a minister on this
question.
And I found that the person who's become illegal,
who is classed as an overstayer, that the problem
can go back to Immigration,
to underpaid, overworked, untrained
people often making decisions which are administrative law
decisions, which means you can't get at the person.
We also, I would suggest, have a big problem, which I'd ask this
committee to have a look at, at what happens to migrants
or intended migrants at the border.
I've spent countless days trying to get through and act as a legal
representative, and my colleagues the same,
at the border to have people turned away,
not questioned in their own language, not given the right to talk to a
lawyer, and shanghaied on a plane back from New
Zealand to where they came from without their case genuinely
being looked at.
I also, in my submission, and I take it from the clerk who was
very helpful, that all members have read the submissions diligently,
and of course they do. All members of Parliament on select committees go there
with an open mind and not what is dictated by their whips,
which is a really good thing about our system,
to look at the Zawi case if you want to look at what
the problem really is. And the problem will be
the denial of justice and of what is now, in my
opinion,
the usual bidding war on who can be tough on
withdrawing rights from immigrants.
So I'm going to just return, I only know I've got a couple more minutes left on
this committee,
but to the Zawi case, because I think it's instructive to go back to that.
It's 2002 to 2007, at the Parliamentary
Library, if your own research teams want to give it to you, will give you the
Refugee Status Appeals Authority decision on this
man.
Why it's important? Because he was classed as a terrorist.
He was kept in prison for two years.
He was on restrictive bail for two years.
And then in 2007,
the new inspector general found that his case was a load
of cobblers, that Immigration,
Security Intelligence Service,
and unfortunately my colleagues, the Prime Minister, the Attorney General, the
Minister of Immigration,
had conspired
to remove all his rights of appeal.
And that's what happens with people when you take away their appeals.
They don't get justice.
I've been many times berated by compliance officers
who I have a love-hate relationship with, with Immigration, because my job
is to act as it does for members of Parliament when people come to them for help,
for the person putting their case to have their case heard.
And I've been told, "You're undermining the integrity of the immigration law."
Because these compliance officers on the front line, I feel for them sometimes,
they know that lawyers, and all of my colleagues,
employers, and some members of Parliament, of course, are
helping people to stay in a job somewhere, in a
house well away from the authorities
while
they find out the facts.
They're not trying to dispute the law.
They're trying to uphold the law, because justice is also part
of integrity. Fairness-
Thank-
... is part of the law.
Thank you, Peter.
My five minutes?
Yes, unfortunately we have reached the end of your five minutes.
Oh, it is unfortunately. I'm sure you'd like to hear me all day on this topic.
We do appreciate you being part of this process, and thank you for your written
submission as well.We'll move on now
to our next submitter. We have Asylum Seeker Support Trust,
Dawit Arshad and Becky Little.
Hopefully,
joining us.
There we go. We have
Becky. And sorry, hopefully, I'm pronouncing Dawit
correctly. Oh, we've got you together, hopefully.
Yeah.
There we go.
Beautiful. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes time for
questions. So we'll hand over to you now.
Hello.
Tena koutou katoa. We are Dawit and Becky of the Asylum Seeker
Support Trust. Thank you for inviting us to come today.
We are a charity supporting over 3,000 people from all over
the world, seeking asylum and safety in New Zealand from persecution,
war, conflict, and climate change.
So we are uniquely placed to speak particularly to the human
impact of the proposals in this bill.
To be clear, we oppose the overall approach of this bill and the
parliamentary papers relating to people seeking asylum and
refugee. We won't go into full details of our written
submission, but we would like to highlight a few of our main
concerns today.
As someone who arrived here under the quota refugee programs and
has called this place home for 28 years, carrying
both the weight of where I came from and the gratitude
for where I have been able to rebuild my life, and I say
this, I'm most deeply upset by the new powers
proposed for immigration officers, requested ID on suspicion
of visa, a breach of being liable for deportation.
In practice,
regardless of a person's status, lawful or not,
temporary residence or citizen, it's clear they will be
used disproportionately against people based on their race,
ethnicity or country of origin. It will be
particularly harmful to people seeking asylums and
refugee. Many have fled countries where question document
check and government monitoring were
used to intimidate or control peoples.
Aotearoa should be a place of safety, not fear and
suspicion.
Suspicion.
Becky, please.
Likewise, the ban on alternative visa pathways for
people who withdraw their asylum claim
at Clause 11 is cruel and counterproductive.
It is cruel to ban people seeking asylum from getting a partnership visa
because they have fallen in love and are in a settled relationship with a New
Zealand partner. It is cruel to ban people seeking asylum from an
alternative visa because they have been offered a job that New Zealand needs
filled, like the person in our hostel who because of their
skills was offered a job in our public sector.
Everybody wins in this scenario. If a person finds
certainty and safety they are seeking in an alternative way, it
is cruel to keep them locked into an often traumatic asylum
process. And the actual reality for most people and families seeking
asylum in New Zealand is that it is a long and certain
and hard life.
And to be clear, there are many things in this bill that we find problematic and
oppose. The proposals in the parliamentary paper relating to kicking out
claims for administrative matters such as missed biometric tests or
limiting their rights of protection because of notions of bad faith, whatever that
means, don't hold up legally in terms of the law and are not justified on the
numbers or evidence. And we refer you-- We can answer questions about that if you'd
like. What we'd like to focus on today is that in justifying this bill, there
has been a characterization of people seeking asylum that the vast majority
are without merit. This is not true, and we wanted to take you through the
facts in terms of the numbers and how asylum claims actually play out.
In New Zealand, we have a very small cohort of people seeking asylum, representing
a tiny proportion of our population, irrespective of the
recent increases. And given the current global perspective and
picture, this increase should not be the shock or surprise that it has been
portrayed. Currently, 170 million people are forcibly
displaced, and this has doubled in the last decade.
We have a tiny and minute 0.04% of our
population that seeks asylum here every year.
And for the last 10 years, at first instance, irrespective of the number of asylum
claims per year, 25% to 35% of asylum claims are successful,
but 40% of those declined are overturned, which brings up the
amount of asylum claims that are ultimately successful to around over
half. And those claims remaining declined after appeal,
some of these will be successful on a later asylum claim because they find more
evidence to support their claim, or they may have real reasons to
feel unsafe or persecuted in their home country and seek asylum abroad,
and they are found to
have credible harm but did not meet the legal
threshold required for protection and recognition as a refugee.
And when we looked at 50 of the last appeal decisions in relation to those that
were dismissed, 74% of these had credible harm, but they
did not meet that high legal threshold.
So on these numbers, a big pillar for the justification of this bill and associated
paper is that the vast majority of asylum claims are without merit.
It's simply knocked away. In reality, the current backlog of claims is a
consequence of a failure to resource the system properly in response to a complex
global picture and our own economic policies of trade agreements, including
visa pathways with countries that have problematic human rights records, meaning
that some migrants will seek refugee or protected status at some stage.
This is not a problem with the law or the processes.
This is system working as intended.
However, rather than explain this whole complex picture contributing to the
pressure and resourcing it appropriately, responsibility for poor planning is
effectively laid at the door of people seeking asylum themselves.
With this bill being a vehicle for doing just that.
It is a poor way to make law, and in doing so, employs a damaging narrative about
people seeking asylum that is not accurate, supported, or justified and
is reckless to the safety of a small and vulnerable community.
Instead, let's talk about resourcing the asylum system properly.
Let's talk about greater help with support to restore mental health, wellbeing,
integration for people who seek safety who are living a life of extreme
uncertainty. We oppose this bill and paper, and we recommend it not to
be put forward for second reading. Thank you.
Thank you both. We do have time for a question,
hopefully maybe two. One from Phil Twyford first.
Thanks you two for that excellent submission.
One of the issues that we haven't heard much about or talked much about
so far on the committee is the provision that would
allow Immigration New Zealand to decline an asylum claim
based on the failure to engage with biometric testing.
Can you just explain for the committee
what is this about? What is the biometric testing?
Have you been able to glean any evidence or data about this
perceived problem that would justify giving Immigration this
power?
No.
There is no evidence really to support that this is a massive problem for
Immigration.
This is
also a particular administrative measure that is
moved within the
refugee process. At the moment, there's like three different groups go at
having a biometric test at different times.
And what we know and what we see from what we do, and we were talking about this in
the office, is that people missing their
biometric test must be incredibly small because what we see is people being
very desperate to kind of get to these tests because
their
asylum claim is their number one priority.
They're also trying to live in an uncertain environment, but their asylum claim
is their number one priority. And it used to happen when you went for your
interview, and you were surrounded with your lawyer, you had an interpreter, so it
was less intimidating.
Mm-hmm.
And now they've brought that forward to
before you get your confirmation of claim letter, you're required to go.
And then there's this second group that is like the sweep-up group that they're
trying to find.
Yeah.
And really this is all about kicking claims out earlier.
It doesn't seem to be supported by any evidence that there's any kind of
nefarious reasons for missing your biometric test.
It's not what we see.
Thank you.
Thank you. And our next question from Ricardo Menendez March.
Yeah. Would you mind expanding on, I guess, what do you see could be the
impact on asylum seekers' well-being,
engagement in public services, and the
consequences to their mental health in relationship to some of the provisions of
this bill?
And actually just start impacting the communities, not only asylum
seekers, the refugee and the Kochari refugees and within the
communities. Start building up a fear and
the fear of just somebody's knocking their door in their workplace, in their
first best areas like a mosque, in a church.
And the worst part is just if this bill is
passed, imagine 28 years I live in this country, never been asked
an ID. Among my Kiwi friends while I'm talking, if
an officer has come to ask me and not an ID,
and you can imagine what sort of feeling I'm going to have.
Mm-hmm.
So this is totally already starting.
Not only them, even I myself personally impacted.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you both. Thank you for being part of this process this morning and for your
written submission as well. It is really helpful for our committee, so we
appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Thank you for having us.
Okay.
Thank you.
Ka kite ano.
We'll move on now.
Just checking we don't have
the Wellington Community Justice Project online, I don't
believe. So we'll keep moving forward now.
Perhaps we have Swakshadeep Sarkar
available for our select committee now.
Just jumped around a little bit, so forgive us.
Hopefully, those that are waiting online are
available.
There we go. Welcome. And my apologies if I've mispronounced your
name.
Um-
We have five minutes with you this morning. That includes time for questions.
Kia ora. Thank you so much for having me.
I'm Swakshadeep, and I finished my PhD last year at
Vic, where I worked with trans asylum seekers and refugees in New
Zealand. So I'm here to strongly oppose the Immigration Enhanced
Risk Management Amendment Bill.
Over the course of oral submissions, a lot of technical gaps in the bill have
already been covered.
And since I have very little time, so I'll only focus on one of the human aspects
of the bill. This doesn't mean that this is the only aspect that needs to
be highlighted, but one of the many.
So,
I'm going to specifically talk about the amendments to the Section 280 of the bill,
which introduces increased surveillance by immigration officers within the
community and at workplaces. So while this is unwelcoming
for all migrant communities,
especially those of color due to the racialization of migrants,
which
there's a long history of,
it will disproportionately impact
asylum seekers and refugees.
This amendment, beyond just being a minor update, as the Honorable Minister was
saying in an earlier session,
particularly harms their process of homemaking and integration.
In one of the earlier sessions, I also heard that anyone behaving suspiciously will
be stopped by the immigration officials and
questioned. I wanted to ask what exactly is suspicious,
or as in the bill, what is good cause to believe that migrants may
be violating visa conditions or may be here
illegally? This is a highly subjective threshold.
Many asylum seekers are scared of enforcement authorities because of
their experiences in their home countries as well as here in New Zealand.
Not too long ago, it was announced that New Zealand would
stop
imprisoning people who are seeking asylum in New
Zealand.
This distress of imprisonment that many asylum seekers have
faced in New Zealand
lives in the communities. There are so many
testimonies-of asylum seekers
being imprisoned during the process of claiming
asylum,
and
they are still undergoing mental health challenges because of their experiences
during imprisonment.
So if someone feels anxious at the sight of an immigration officer, would
that be deemed as suspicious? An overarching question that
needs to be asked is would anyone feel safe at a place where their
identities and behavior are always under scrutiny?
Research has shown that in New Zealand, asylum seekers and refugees already
face a lot of scrutiny when accessing different institutions and
services. This amendment adds to the scrutiny, resulting
in a feeling of non-belongingness.
Promoting integration for asylum seekers and refugees is a moral, ethical and
legal responsibility of New Zealand under the international conventions,
and this bill does exactly the opposite.
The wider logic of this bill and the messaging, unsupported by data,
as many submissions have already mentioned, is to create an atmosphere of fear
amongst the migrant and refugee communities.
I also want to conclude by saying that
effective immigration policy is about maintaining trust between
migrant communities and the state.
When surveillance becomes the dominant framework of engagement, it risks
undermining the trust, which is essential for genuine integration and safety for
everyone in New Zealand. And with that, I end.
Thank you so much for having me.
Thank you very much, Swatchadeep.
It doesn't appear that we have any questions from our committee, but that does not
reflect a lack of interest. It means you've given us a very helpful-- Oh, okay.
Ricardo, we've got time for one very quick question.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
Have you seen any evidence
in the documents presented to support this bill that
justifies the changes that are being put into place?
What's the evidential basis you've seen for the changes?
I think the evidential basis that I've seen for these changes are actually
unsupported by any data.
Because there's so much data already existing,
or so much research already done on the
emotional and mental health and what the system does
to asylum seekers and refugees, and I think we should move forward to
easing some of these rather than creating new additional challenges
that are unsupported by data in itself.
To me, some of that really appear to be well
thought about rather than
something emerging out of the engagement with the communities.
Yeah. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much, Swatchadeep. Appreciate your participation in this process.
Thank you.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Te Rangi Cleaver.
Te Rangi, we have five minutes with you this morning.
Welcome. Thank you for being part of this process, and we'll give the
time to you now.
Kia ora. Ko Te Rangi ahau. He uri ahau nō Ngāti Kahungunu ki
Wairoa. I am a poet, so my kupu comes from my puku.
I am of Māori and Sri Lankan descent.
One part of my whakapapa has belonged to this whenua for hundreds of years,
and the other crossed oceans to arrive here.
I understand intimately that movement has always been part of the human story.
And I cannot help but notice how convenient it is
whenever this country
faces economic pressure, a vulnerable community suddenly gets pulled from
a hat and turned into a target.
My last select committee hearing was postponed to today because this
government was busy advancing legislation targeting transgender people
instead. Somehow, the ones already carrying the most pain become
responsible for everything this government has broken, and today, I suppose, we've
landed on migrants. Not landlords or billionaires or corporations
making record profits while people struggle, or this government cutting
thousands of public sector jobs just last week.
Austerity politicians create the conditions for desperation and then act shocked
when people demand someone to blame.
And this country already has a history of using state-sanctioned violence
against migrant communities to distract from its political failures.
The dawn raids were also justified through the language of immigration enforcement,
and now we look back on it as a chapter of shame.
So I think this committee should ask itself very carefully what kind of
political legacy it wants to leave behind this time.
There was no game plan there, and there is no game plan here.
This amendment bill acts like it exists independently from the global
rise in anti-migrant politics currently spreading across the Western
world. I know this country does not want the spectacle of ICE.
It doesn't want the international shame of the Rwanda deportation scheme.
So instead, you create your own polished New Zealand
version, your own clean, green crackdown.
Politics never exists in a vacuum, so to the Pākehā MPs on this
committee supporting this amendment, I'll ask you plainly, how do you
think your tupuna got here?
For real.
Did the Crown fill out the correct paperwork?
Did it pass character assessments?
Did it prove it was economically useful before occupying Māori
land? Settler colonialism was never subjected to this kind of
scrutiny, and there is such an irony in listening
to descendants of settlers construct a moral panic around migration
now. Especially when many of the people targeted by increasingly punitive
border regimes come from nations shaped by colonial extraction carried out
by the very same global powers now criminalizing their movement.
The West sets fire to entire regions and then criminalizes the
people fleeing the smoke. And honestly, I find it especially
pathetic watching MPs from immigrant backgrounds support
legislation like this. Pretending political proximity to power
erases the histories that shaped their own communities, because once you make it
through the door, they teach you to pull the ladder up behind you, don't they?
You do not get to speak proudly about your migrant story while supporting
policies that force other migrant communities to live in deeper fear,
because even when these communities get here and they do everything right and they
check all the right boxes, you still want to be able to hold the blade
above their necks. Prove your humanity over and over and over
again. Be monitored, be investigated, be questioned on
suspicion, be turned into paperwork, spend your life proving you
deserve to exist here. Be silent, be perfect, be
grateful, or we will send you back.What
this bill makes clear is who this
government considers inherently disposable, because I'm guessing Peter
Thiel doesn't get stopped in the street and questioned on suspicion.
Funny how that works. New Zealand celebrates its migrant success stories
while constructing suspicion around migrants who arrive without wealth, without
whiteness, or geopolitical usefulness.
We see the political strategy. We know why migrants are being targeted.
We are not naive enough to mistake your scapegoating for solutions.
Migrants are our whānau. They are exhausted parents,
children trying to feel safe, people building lives while
politicians debate whether they deserve dignity at all.
I implore this committee to reject this bill in full,
and I will not be taking any questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Te Rangi. I appreciate your involvement in
the process. And we'll move on now to
Kaye Jones.
Kaye?
Hopefully, we have you ready.
Let's
check if-- Oh, we do. Wonderful. Kaye, welcome.
There we go.
Kia ora, committee.
Kia ora. We have five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions. We'll pass it over to you now.
My name is Kaye Jones. I'm a former policy advisor and more
recently a community volunteer.
One of my areas of community activism is pushing for laws to
be fair, just and humane.
In my view, this bill falls short of that standard.
I'm not an immigration lawyer, nor a professional advisor to migrants and
refugees seeking to live and work or study or settle in Aotearoa.
I have, however, met people in these situations and have heard their stories on
why they're here and what their hopes are.
I won't read my submission, but I will highlight one point.
Some people are particularly vulnerable to accusations of falsifying
documents or biometric information.
These include gender minority people, whether they're
transgender or non-binary, or have an innate
variation of sexual characteristics known as intersex.
If the bill requires matching biometric documents to
avoid accusations of fraud that could
inadvertently target for exclusion trans and
non-binary migrants who arrive in Aotearoa,
that they arrive with documents that may reflect a birth
label, but not who they really are.
A trans woman may travel as a man because that's the
only way she can leave another country.
On arriving at a safer country, she may feel the
freedom to transform her appearance and her
gender expression even before or without getting documents to
match her identity. Or she may have documents that show that,
but there are also documents that do not match.
In my written submission, I mention Eliana Rubashkin.
She is one of many gender minority people whose original travel
documents don't match who they are now.
They're not lying or trying to commit fraud.
They're trying to live as their real selves.
Sometimes a change in appearance reflects their ability to
access gender affirmation treatment in Aotearoa that wasn't
safe before.
Eliana's talked of gaining freedom being here in Aotearoa.
That feeling of safety is something she can't describe.
The feeling of, "I'm walking in the street and I'm not going to die.
I can do whatever I want. I can put on whatever color of
lipstick, whatever heels, whatever clothes, anything.
I'm not going to die here." That's a quote from an article on the
Human Rights Commission's website with Eliana after
she moved here.
If efficiency moves by Immigration New Zealand
include the use of AI tools, including
facial recognition, matching photos as biometric
information, there is going to be an increased risk
of false matches, especially of people of color who are
poorly recognized with facial recognition
technology. And if gender minority people
seeking refugee status and an extension to a visa are turned down
after these false,
or bad faith, or whatever grounds,
they may face being deported to a country where
they're in even more extreme danger if they have
started presenting who they are.
So as currently worded, the bill is likely to
raise risks for gender minority people who may be deported and more at
harm if they are sent back to countries of origin.
There are similar risks for lesbian, gay and bisexual asylum seekers
that even sharing information justifying
asylum grounds can raise the risks for them if those
grounds are denied.
Part of Aotearoa's reputation internationally relies on our
reputation for fairness and openness.
We want Aotearoa to be a future home for skilled workers and other migrants
attracted by that reputation, and we should live up to it.
So I'll leave it there if there's any questions.
Thank you. Unfortunately, we don't have time for any questions with you, but that
is
part of the process. We appreciate you being part of it with us this morning.
Thank you.Kia ora.
We will move on now to Melanie Higgins.
Hopefully, Melanie, we have you
online ready to go.
Melanie, you just need to accept the request to become a
panelist.
Hopefully, Melanie, there should be a pop-up in front of you that says, "Request
promotion to become a panelist," or something to that
effect.
We have the next submitter available while we resolve that.
Okay. Yeah, let's do that. Next, we have the Supreme Sikh
Society of New Zealand. I believe we have Daljit Singh.
Hopefully, Daljit, you're able to
jump online.
Appreciate your
presence early so that we can
get you into our committee. Wonderful.
Daljit,
if you want to unmute and turn on your camera,
we can see you and hear you.
There we go.
Do you want to just turn your microphone on?
We can't yet hear you.
There we go. Okay. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand it over to you now.
Yeah. It's me and Matt Robson both are here.
He will take five minutes, and I will take five minutes.
He's the leader of the Supreme Sikh Society of New Zealand.
On the behalf of the Society, I submit
this formal opposition to Immigration Enhancement
Risk Management Amendment Bill. While we
recognize the government's intent to improve the integrity of the
immigration
system, the proposed amendment as drafted raise profound
concern regarding fundamental democratic principles, the rule of
the
law, and the protection of the individual rights.
Our key concerns are
erosion of judicial authority. We are deeply alarmed by proposal that
would empowering Immigration New Zealand to deport individual even after a
New Zealand court has granted a discharge without
conviction. They effectively allows executive bodies
to override the judiciary by dismissing the careful, considered
judgment of the court, which acts only when the consequences
of conviction would be disproportionate harass, and the bill
undermine the separation of power and subject individual to
punishment without conviction. Threat to due
process appeal rights. The proposal to limit Immigration and
Protection Tribunal ability to consider bad faith, and
removal of the rights to
bring late appeals represent
a significant rollback and natural justice.
A robust democracy requires mechanism
that allows to individual circumstances.
Potential for overreach and administration
discretion granted broader discrimination power to NJ couples with
reduced appeal rights risk creating environments where
policy dictates they prioritize over human rights
when executive agencies are granted executive power with limited--
Hold on. Somebody trying to call me, and I
actually was on my phone, so-
So phone going to be-
Right
... the line actually going to be disturbed. Sorry.
So,
the broader discrimination power to NJ couples of reducing appeal rights,
risk creating an environment where policy dictates and prioritize
over human rights. And social cohesion and migrant
stability. Extending the
deportation liability windows
and tightening refugee protection pathway will undoubtedly
foster a climate of fear and permanent stability of
many within the wider community.
Conclusion. The Supreme Sikh Society of New Zealand believe that this bill is
current from foreign places is pursuant of administrative
efficiency above the fundamental human
rights and legal protections that
define our nations. We urge the committee to reject the proposal
that undermine judicial reviews.
And
remind
that many cases NJ get wrong,
need strong appeal rights and time to get justice.
So
so-called unskilled workers are skilled.
We does many individual cases from the Society
through the member of Parliament or lawyer to have
to fight for to get the justice. And
there was a lot of times promise was made, especially the English
language barrier was so high, especially for truck drivers,
6.5.
That's actually too much, can't actually be achieved by the truck driver.
So theThere are some jobs which actually
need only probably maybe four, 4.5 English test, not
6.5. So we strongly oppose these bills and requesting the
committee to please
reject this bill. Thank you.
And thank you very much, Daljit. We have a question from Phil Twyford.
Thank you. Daljit, you represent
a large and very politically active and
influential community.
Mm-hmm.
Given that it's election year,
what do you think your community is thinking about
this bill and the immigration policies of this government?
This is a disaster. And everybody
actually are in fear. They approaching the
organizations to
fight for justice and strongly oppose this
proposed bill, and ask the
chairing committee to reject this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Ricardo.
Just on the provisions of the bill that allows compliance
officers to ask for identification for people who
they basically suspect may be in breach of their visa conditions.
Do you have concerns that specific communities may be more likely
to be targeted than others? And what harms do you think could result
as a result of these provisions?
Yeah, that's true, Ricardo. We
strongly believe that there are a fear already
actually gone through the community, that if this proposed bill
actually came into effect, this will be a wider impact
certain communities, and that's why we are strongly
oppose the
enhancement immigration bill.
Okay. Thank you for being part of this process, Daljit. We really do appreciate it.
Thank you.
And your written submission as well. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye.
Okay.
Now, can I just check that we haven't missed anybody?
We've got Melanie
hopefully is ready. Otherwise?
That's correct.
Brilliant.
Okay. So Melanie, hopefully you've accepted. There we go. Oh, cool.
We can see you now. If you just unmute, turn your camera on, we'll be
ready to go.
There we go. We have lift off. Yes.
Sorry. Is that better?
Wonderful. No, that's okay. It looks like you're anonymizing yourself
actually, Melanie .
Oh, yeah. Sorry.
So look, we've got five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand it over to you now.
Cool. Thank you. Good morning, and thank you for the chance to speak today.
As said, my name's Melanie Higgins.
In regard to my submission, just some concerns from personal experience,
friends, acquaintances experiences, regarding the extension
to the liability of deportation time frames.
Especially for the lower level offenses for residents from two to
five years. As we know, I've only got up to five minutes, so I will lack a
level of detail, but I'll just stick more to one section of the amendment bill that
was included.
Just the first one, to be granted residence in the first place.
As you're aware,
there's already a high standard in place, with rigorous checks on character and
history.
So anyone who's been a resident will have had to have passed this process to
start with.
And then a lot of time a residence will have had
sorry, to have been here previously and lived in New Zealand for a certain amount
of time,
and then gone for two years before they're no longer liable for deportation
for lower level PD offenses.
To push it up to five years when it's already two years is a long time to kind of
be on a probation-y type thing on top of all the
rigorous checks and previous time already spent here.
There'll be a lot of people here who have already paid for residency,
understanding the time frames and trusting that it will be the way that it will
work for them. To kind of move the goal
posts after people have
made decisions based on the rules they were presented with, and having paid some
quite large fees and associated costs to the government in getting
residency here, it's going to make people, including New Zealanders, doubt the
integrity and credibility of rules in place governing
things,
that they are going to be committing to the government.
And it is unfair for those people whose money we have taken to change these rules,
especially if we're saying that it's being done to protect New Zealanders from
serious offenders when this is clearly something different to that,
and it's not about things just at that level.
It's also something that undermines things that we are signatories
to in international law.
Because I've just looked up from a legal standpoint regarding the UN legal
frameworks that New Zealand is a signatory to.
There is a requirement for legal predictability.
The UN's Global Compact for Migration goes into this in Objective
12.
By emphasizing
the right to legal certainty, it states, "Strengthen certainty
and predictability in migration procedures for appropriate
screening, assessment and referral."
Under this, that is signed into New Zealand law.
So migrants and residents must be able to reasonably predict
the legal consequences of their actions.
And to change the deportation liability retrospectively for
people who have already obtained residency and reached the different
timeframe milestones undermines this.
Moving the legal parameters
retroactively directly undermines the GCM's core mandate
to provide stable, safe and regular pathways for
international migrationIt also affects the UN rights
of the child when children are affected by this and potentially
separated from a parent because of deportation.
And if it is for lower-level petty offenses, it's likely to be for
something where deportation punishment is
disproportionate to what actually happened.
We are in a situation where we need people like doctors, other healthcare
staff.
Sorry, my curtain just fell down. And other critical jobs that we need
done here. This seems punitive towards people who are
coming here who we need, and they don't specifically need us,
they have other choices of different countries to go to that are also crying
out for these
certain workers. This will make New Zealand less attractive to these people.
As we know, a lot of New Zealanders who get qualified for positions,
quite a few friends of mine, have left overseas where the pay is better, the
costs of essentials aren't as high.
Sorry. I tried to find out percentage of serious offenses
committed in New Zealand by migrants, and I couldn't actually find out the specific
information. You'd probably have access to that.
But from looking through news reports, it looks like the vast majority of serious
offenders are actually New Zealanders.
So, to protect New Zealanders and human beings in general from serious
offenders, it doesn't look like this is really going to make much of a
difference, and the government could do much better by going after serious
offenders across the board through law and order changes than going
after a minority that accounts for a much smaller percentage of these
offenses.
Yeah, and just, I don't know how long I've been, but to wrap it up, I just
suggest that we don't disadvantage the vulnerable just because we have a position
of advantage over them in numbers,
and that we don't empower kind of bullies any more than they already
are because although some of the big, powerful countries are
acting like you should use your power over others if you have it.
Being in a not so powerful country, we shouldn't be
helping to move the world any more towards that because New Zealand potentially
wouldn't do well in a world where more powerful countries have
that attitude toward us.
It also weakens the moral high ground that we used to rely on to make points on the
world stage, that I feel has already been weakened enough.
Thank you, Melanie. We really appreciate you being part of this process.
Hopefully your curtain's
not beyond repair.
Think the cat's been swinging on it.
We really appreciate your participation.
Thank you, and your written submission as well.
Thank you.
So, thank you so much for joining in.
Thanks.
Okay.
We're now moving into private session, committee.
So, we'll do that. Going to-